---
layout: post
title: Reflective Essay
subtitle: 
categories: Essay
tags: [Essay]
---

## Reflective Essay 

For this reflective essay I am going to follow Rolfe reflection model of “what, so what and now what” and I will explain the module and the tasks in chronological order (Rolfe, 2001).
The first unit had a collaborative discussion as an assignment where I was supposed to choose a case from the Association of Computer Machinery (ACM) website. All the case studies are posing the moral dilemma, and I needed to compare the ACM analysis with the British Computer Science (BCS) code of conduct. The incident that is described in the case study explains how Machine Learning Algorithm ingested biased data and used it as a training data which corrupted the blockage of malicious content for the users and ended up blocking educational content and discriminating. This made me realise that when it comes to production the behavior of the algorithm can change in the real-life application and that human oversight is necessary. I also understand that it is close to impossible to anticipate actions of activist groups that may influence the algorithm hence these examples are very valuable. Going forward as a professional data scientist I would anticipate the possible corruption of the data by players in digital space and consider possible costs in terms of time and effort to update the model. 
Another case that was analysed by a peer was about dark UX patterns. The case study explains how confusing design forced customers into unwanted actions. When I started reflecting on it and researching further, I realised that this is a common case nowadays. Just recently Amazon was sued for concealing opt-out from prime membership and a list of dark design malpractices used by Ryanair is numerous. While this could be successful in a short term for company sales, it causes harm, violates consumer rights, and eventually affects the company brand. Going forward I have learned that as a professional it is important and possible to stand against such orders from the clients so in my practice, I will pay close attention to the intentions of proposed UX design. 
The second collaborative discussion in unit seven was concerning the accuracy of information presented by the research scientist and potential case of pressure he may face since the findings contradicted the narrative of the manufacturer. Coming from social sciences background I am aware of malpractices when it comes to statistics and research data, so I was sceptical. I didn’t see the link to the AI ethical principles until my colleague Lucas in his peer response highlighted the role of AI when it comes to information spread and automated recommender systems. I researched the use of AI when it comes to food industry and understood the magnitude of the problem and the before and after AI effect. The problem the way I see it is that people tend to unfortunately trust AI blindly and with using AI for shopping, robotic cooking, recipe creation and nutritional advice such misinformation can cause significant harm. Going forward I am aware that seemingly insignificant choice of representing more favorable results of research violates principles of truthfulness, transparency and accountability (Corrêa et al., 2023) and can lead to health harm. 
For the literature review task, I had a choice of various topics, and I chose misinformation on social media. I am fascinated by the effect of social media on our lives, and the role misinformation play in it. I started to investigate the reasons why some posts go viral, what causes it and how others try to tackle it. There seem to be a consensus in the field that misinformation on social media causes problems that should be addressed. Since NLP is a new topic for me I got familiar with the stages of its development and the algorithms before and after transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). While comparing approaches and methods used, I was getting increasingly confused until I got feedback on my approach. Methods in this fields are not easy to compare as well as research designs since every researcher is trying to outperform the previous however the concept at times differ. I must admit I felt overwhelmed with the amount of information about ways to process text, ways to identify misinformation and use of additional data like propagation, user characteristics and knowledge bases to check the truth.  I ended up looking and comparing the claims authors are making and going forward this will be a focus of my literature review. In the absence of right and wrong approaches and concepts, there are advantages and disadvantages to every so having this in mind, focusing on claims, achieved results and practicality is my motto for the upcoming research project. 
Advancing the field felt even more challenging since outstanding studies have already achieved excellent results on misinformation identification (Patel & Sutrakar, 2025; Twum, 2025) so taking the future research question of Patel and Sutrakar (2025) of applying LLM for text processing and plugging it in their topic modelling pipeline was the most practical research proposal I could think of. In truth the possibilities of research and development in this field are enormous because technology evolves rapidly and we have more agents that spread misinformation using various modes and the trust of public in AI. 
The last assignment was about hypothesis testing using excel. The assignment contains excellent scaffold on how to execute it. I was pleasantly surprised that excel has evolved so much that hypothesis testing is relatively straightforward. I used to execute T test relatively often due to my work while comparing means between the different groups (departments) and I used SPSS for the same. Excel is easy to use which made me realise that there is no need for licensed software anymore for simple hypothesis testing. Going forward if there is such a requirement at my work, I can easily use Excel plug in. 
The evidence of the skills development and applied in this module can be found in my portfolio. Please follow this link https://vict0ri-a.github.io

## Bibliography
Corrêa, N. K., Galvão, C., Santos, J. W., Del Pino, C., Pinto, E. P., Barbosa, C., Massmann, D., Mambrini, R., Galvão, L., Terem, E., & De Oliveira, N. (2023). Worldwide AI ethics: A review of 200 guidelines and recommendations for AI governance. Patterns, 4(10), 100857. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100857
Patel, A., & Sutrakar, V. K. (2025). Advanced Text Analytics—Graph Neural Network for Fake News Detection in Social Media (Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2502.16157
Rolfe, G. et. al. (2001). Critical reflection in nursing and the helping professions: A user’s  guide. Palgrave Macmillan.
Twum, S. (2025). Misinformation Detection on Social Media, a Big Data and Machine Learning Approach. International Journal of Science, Architecture, Technology and Environment, 552–570. https://doi.org/10.63680/x2343vy86bt654v6
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf

